Tutorials setup truffle oz and create collectable token (#288)
rsksmart/rsksmart.github.io: tutorials/ethereum-devs/setup-truffle-oz.md

```

![local node eth_blockNumber](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-10.png)

The response should look similar to this:

```json
{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"result":"0x2991b"}
```

The result property is the number of the latest block that has been synced. Note that this value (`0x2991b`) is the block number in hexadecimal, so the output above indicates that the current block number is 170267 in decimal.

* To get more information about this process:
[Setup RSKj with Java](/rsk/node/install/java/)

* If you encounter any problems, check if your system meets the [minimum requirements](/rsk/node/install/requirements/).

* There are other ways to install a RSK node, in other supported platforms: [Installing RSKj](/rsk/node/install/)

# RSK Testnet - verify the connection 

In addition to using the local node, we want to publish smart contracts to the testnet. Before it, let's check if the connection is working.

This is an example using cURL. Enter the following command into your terminal. 

```shell
curl https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co/1.3.0/ -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" --data '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","method":"eth_blockNumber","params":[],"id":1}'
```

> > If you are using a Windows OS, I suggest to use the Git Bash terminal. Download the installer from the Git official site. [https://git-scm.com/](https://git-scm.com/) 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# RSK Testnet - verify the connection 

In addition to using the local node, we want to publish smart contracts to the testnet. Before it, let's check if the connection is working.

This is an example using cURL. Enter the following command into your terminal. 

```shell
curl https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co/1.3.0/ -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" --data '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","method":"eth_blockNumber","params":[],"id":1}'
```

This is a very simple query that simply asks what the latest block number is. 

You should receive a response similar to the following:

```json
{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"result":"0xc3f9b"}
```

![testnet eth_blockNumber](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-11.png)

The result field is presented in hexadecimal. `0xc3f9b` is the block number, and it's decimal equivalent is: `802715`.  
You can consult [testnet explorer](https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/) and verify that it is the same result for block number.

![explorer testnet block number](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-12.png)

# Initialize a Truffle project

We have two options for initializing a project:

1. An empty project
2. A project based in a Truffle Box

> ## 1- Initialize an empty Truffle project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1 - Initialize an empty Truffle project
```

Create a new folder. For example, `myproject`, and navigate to the folder in the terminal.

```shell
mkdir myproject
cd myproject
```

> For example, I will create a folder at this location - `C:\RSK\` (I'm using windows OS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, I will create a folder at this location - `C:\RSK\` (I'm using Windows).
```

My project can be located in the folder `C:\RSK\myproject`.

![myproject folder](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-13.png)

In your project folder, start an Truffle project in this folder by typing the below command into the terminal:

```shell
truffle init
```

![truffle init](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-14.png)

> Open the folder in VSCode to view the file structure like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the folder in VS Code to view the file structure like this:
```

![truffle file structure](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-15.png)

* `./contracts`: All our smart contracts will be stored in this folder.
* `./migrations`: Deployment scripts will be stored in this folder.
* `./test`: Test scripts will be stored in this folder.
* `./truffle-config.js`: This is Truffle's configuration file used to configure networks, including RSK networks.

Note that the following files were also created:

* `Migrations.sol`: Keeps track of which migrations were done on the current network.
* `1_initial_migration.js`: Deployment instructions for `Migrations.sol`.

### Initialize an npm project

When we initialize an empty Truffle project, we also need to initialize an npm project.

Start an npm project in the `myproject` folder by typing the following commands below into the terminal:

```shell
npm init -y
```

![npm init](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-16.png)

> ## 2- Initialize a project based in a Truffle Box

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2 - Initialize a project based in a Truffle Box
```

> Remember only choose this option if you haven't gone through option 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: Only do this if you have not done option 1.
```

Truffle Boxes are templates. 
In addition to Truffle, 

> Truffle Boxes can contain other helpful modules, such as, Solidity contracts & libraries, front-end views and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Truffle Boxes can contain other helpful modules, such as Solidity smart contracts, libraries, front-end views, and more.
```

> In option 1, when we use `truffle init`, we used a special kind of truffle box. 
> Check out other [boxes] (https://www.trufflesuite.com/boxes)
> 
> Also we have some of them already configured for RSK, [check it out here](https://developers.rsk.co/tutorials/truffle-boxes/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In option 1, when we use `truffle init`, we used a special kind of truffle box. 
Check out other [boxes] (https://www.trufflesuite.com/boxes).

Also we have some of them already configured for RSK, [check it out here](https://developers.rsk.co/tutorials/truffle-boxes/).
```

> # Install Open Zeppelin (OZ)
> 
> OpenZeppelin Contracts is a set of libraries of smart contracts for Ethereum and other blockchains. 
> These libraries will install not only the main libraries of our token but also libraries for ownership, safe math, and many other utilities. 
> It's worth mentioning that these libraries have been reviewed and audited to accomplish high standards of security so contracts that depend on them are less susceptible to hacking when used correctly.
> 
> In the terminal, inside `myproject` folder, install OpenZeppelin libraries using this command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Install Open Zeppelin

Open Zeppelin Contracts is a set of libraries of Solidity smart contracts for Ethereum and other blockchains. 
These libraries will install not only the main libraries required for our token,
but also libraries for ownership, safe math, and many other utilities. 
It's worth mentioning that these libraries have been reviewed and audited to accomplish high standards of security,
so contracts that depend on them are less susceptible to hacking when used correctly.

In the terminal, inside `myproject` folder, install Open Zeppelin libraries using this command:
```

```shell
npm install -E @openzeppelin/contracts@2.5.0
```

> The option `-E` is to save dependencies with an exact version rather than using npm's default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The option `-E` is to save dependencies with an exact version rather than the latest version published on npm.
```

![openzeppelin install](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-17.png)

> Some contracts may change over time, so it is important to set the version. This tutorial was written using this specific version.

For more info: 

[openzeppelin.com/contracts](https://openzeppelin.com/contracts/)

# Install HD wallet provider

To connect to the RSK network, we are going to use a provider that allows us to connect to any network by unlocking an account locally. We are going to use `@truffle/hdwallet-provider`. 
This can be used to sign transactions for addresses derived from a 12 or 24 word mnemonic.

> > You need to have installed Node >= 7.6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You need to have Node >= 7.6 installed.
```

In the terminal, inside the `myproject` folder, install the HD wallet provider with this command:

```shell
npm install -E @truffle/hdwallet-provider@1.0.34
```

![hd wallet provider install](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-18.png)

> As I said before, the option `-E` is to save dependencies with an exact version rather than using npm's default.
> 
> This `truffle package` comes with so many dependencies. 
> A successful installation message is shown if everything works fine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `truffle package` comes with many dependencies,
and so can take a long time to complete. 
A successful installation message is shown if everything works fine.
```

![hd wallet provider successful installation](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-19.png)

# Check package.json

`package.json` is a file created by npm with some configurations, 
including the packages which we installed before using the command `npm init -y`.

After the installations, 

> I will open the project folder named `myproject` in VSCode and verify the file package.json. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I will open the project folder named `myproject` in VS Code and verify the file `package.json`. 
```

Let's take a look at the dependencies in the file:

![package.json](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-20.png)

# Create a wallet

To use testnet, we need tR-BTC and an address to store them. 
The best way is to create a wallet from a mnemonic, using the pattern defined at [BIP39](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki)

There are a few ways to do this.

One is to create using a web wallet, such as Metamask or Nifty wallet. 
These wallets generate the mnemonic for you. 
If you wanted to create using Metamask, you can get the instructions here:

- [using Remix and Metamask with RSK testnet](https://developers.rsk.co/tutorials/ethereum-devs/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/)

## iancoleman.io/bip39

Another way is using this web app: 

[iancoleman.io/bip39](https://iancoleman.io/bip39/)

> > In this tutorial, the method used in creating the mnemonic is not recommended to be used for any 'real' wallet because it's not secure enough to generate a private key in a website, however we will use this here for learning purposes, and because we're using the Testnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: In this tutorial, the method used to store the mnemonic is not recommended to be used for any 'real' wallet because it's not secure enough to generate a private key in a website, however we will use this here for learning purposes, and because we're using the Testnet, so no real amounts are at stake.
```

In the `Generate a random mnemonic` field, select `12 words` and click on the `generate` button.

![Generate a random mnemonic](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-21.png)

The result appears in the `BIP39 Mnemonic` field. 
They should be 12 random words like the words in the image:

![BIP39 Mnemonic](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-22.png)

My mnemonic is: 

```
energy knife ice mouse merge track cram brown decorate atom rule virus
```

Copy these 12 words, we'll use it later in this tutorial.

> ## Package mnemonics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## mnemonics module
```

Another alternative is using package [mnemonics](https://github.com/itinance/mnemonics), 
which is a simple utility that can be used to generate [BIP39](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki) mnemonics.

To install `mnemonics` globally, input the command below into the terminal and press `enter` at your project location:

```shell
npm install -g mnemonics@1.1.3
```

> To use it to generate a 12-word BIP39 mnemonic, enter this command into your terminal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this to generate a 12-word BIP39 mnemonic, by entering this command:
```

```shell
mnemonics > .secret
```

> This is saving a new mnemonic in the file named `.secret`, which is the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This saves a new mnemonic in the file named `.secret`, which is the next step.
```

> # Create file .secret

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Create .secret file
```

if (!mnemonic || mnemonic.split(' ').length !== 12) {
  throw new Error('unable to retrieve mnemonic from .secret');
}

module.exports = {
  networks: {
  },
  compilers: {
    solc: {
    }
  }
}
```

The `hdwallet-provider` allows us to connect to any network by unlocking an account locally, including the RSK networks. 

Also we are loading the mnemonic stored in file `.secret`, and saving it at variable mnemonic.

## Configure Truffle to connect to RSK regtest (local node)

In the `truffle-config.js` file, include this configuration at `network` section:

```javascript
    development: {
      host: "127.0.0.1",
      port: 4444,
      network_id: "*"
    },  
```

This is the result:

![network development](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-24.png)

## Get the current gas price of testnet

Get the current gas price of the testnet network, and save to `.gas-price-testnet.json`. 

In your project folder, run this cURL command:

```shell
curl https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co/1.3.0/ -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" --data '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","method":"eth_gasPrice","params":[],"id":1}' > .gas-price-testnet.json
```

> If you are using a Windows OS, I suggest you use the Git Bash terminal. 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You should receive a response similar to the following in the file:

```json
{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"result":"0x3938700"}
```

![gas-price-testnet.json](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-26.png)

The result value is presented in hexadecimal.

Modify the `truffle-config` file again to use the updated gas price. After mnemonic part, include this:

```javascript
const gasPriceTestnetRaw = fs.readFileSync(".gas-price-testnet.json").toString().trim();
const gasPriceTestnet = parseInt(JSON.parse(gasPriceTestnetRaw).result, 16);
if (typeof gasPriceTestnet !== 'number' || isNaN(gasPriceTestnet)) {
  throw new Error('unable to retrieve network gas price from .gas-price-testnet.json');
}
console.log("Gas price Testnet: " + gasPriceTestnet);
```

## Configure Truffle to connect to RSK testnet

In the `truffle-config.js` file, include this configuration at `network` section:

```javascript
    testnet: {
      provider: () => new HDWalletProvider(mnemonic, 'https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co/1.3.0/'),
      network_id: 31,
      gasPrice: Math.floor(gasPriceTestnet * 1.1),
      networkCheckTimeout: 1e9
    },
```

## Truffle config with local and testnet RSK networks

> This is the final `truffle-config.js` file with both networks configurations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the final `truffle-config.js` file with configurations for both networks:
```

```javascript
const HDWalletProvider = require('@truffle/hdwallet-provider');
 
const fs = require('fs');
const mnemonic = fs.readFileSync(".secret").toString().trim();
if (!mnemonic || mnemonic.split(' ').length !== 12) {
  throw new Error('unable to retrieve mnemonic from .secret');
}
 
const gasPriceTestnetRaw = fs.readFileSync(".gas-price-testnet.json").toString().trim();
const gasPriceTestnet = parseInt(JSON.parse(gasPriceTestnetRaw).result, 16);
if (typeof gasPriceTestnet !== 'number' || isNaN(gasPriceTestnet)) {
  throw new Error('unable to retrieve network gas price from .gas-price-testnet.json');
}
console.log("Gas price Testnet: " + gasPriceTestnet);
 
module.exports = {
  networks: {
    development: {
      host: "127.0.0.1",
      port: 4444,
      network_id: "*"
    },
    testnet: {
      provider: () => new HDWalletProvider(mnemonic, 'https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co/1.3.0/'),
      network_id: 31,
      gasPrice: Math.floor(gasPriceTestnet * 1.1),
      networkCheckTimeout: 1e9
    },        
  },
  compilers: {
    solc: {
    }
  }
}
```

> Check out the VSCode image too:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out the VS Code image too:
```

# Truffle Console connected to RSK network

Truffle has its own console to run commands, and can be connected on any network previously configured in `truffle-config.js` file.

## Connect to RSK regtest (local node)

Let's open a Truffle console to connect to our local node.

In the terminal, inside the `myproject` folder, run this command:

```shell
truffle console
```

![Truffle console development](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-28.png)

> Any network defined with the name `development` is considered the default network. 

## Connect to RSK testnet

Thus far we have only connected to a blockchain that runs using just 1 node, that runs on your own computer. 
Let's now switch to interacting with a "real" blockchain, which is running on multiple nodes distributed across multiple computers!

To connect Truffle console in another network, you need to specify the network:

Open up a new terminal. 

In the new terminal, inside the `myproject` folder, run this command:

```shell
truffle console --network testnet
```

It takes a little longer to establish this connection when compared to the local node. 

> And you go to a new console:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will open a new console:
```

Shows the last block number

```javascript
(await web3.eth.getBlockNumber()).toString()
```

![getBlockNumber](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-30.png)

### Network ID

To get the network ID, run this command:

```javascript
(await web3.eth.net.getId()).toString()
```

For the local node, the network ID is `33`.

![getId local](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-31.png)

And for testnet, it is `31`.

![getId testnet](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-32.png)

## Exit Truffle console

In the Truffle console, enter this command to exit the terminal:

```shell
.exit
```

![exit Truffle console](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-33.png)

# Get addresses

We will use a special instruction in Truffle console to get the first 10 addresses in our hierarchical deterministic wallet for the RSK Testnet network, that are generated from our mnemonic.

In the terminal, inside the `myproject` folder, go to the Truffle console connected to testnet:

```shell
truffle console --network testnet
```

And run this command to save the addresses at variable `accounts`:

```javascript
const accounts = Object.keys(web3.currentProvider.wallets)
```

> You may get an`undefined` response,  though strange, but it means that everything is fine.
> 
> It is possible to see the addresses after it by entering the command below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the addresses after it by entering the command below:
```

Seeing `undefined` is expected here because that is the return value of the statement entered into the REPL, the result of the assignment.

```javascript
accounts
```

![list accounts](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-34.png)

Now we will write them to a file named `.accounts`

```javascript
await require('fs').promises.writeFile('.accounts', accounts.join('\n'))
```

![create file .accounts](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-35.png)

And we can check the file:

![file .accounts](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-36.png)

## Check balance

To check the balance of an account, for example, the first account of our list (`account[0]`), run this command in Truffle console:

```javascript
(await web3.eth.getBalance(accounts[0])).toString()
```

![getBalance accounts 0](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-37.png)

> The balance is 0 and we need some tR-BTC to pay gas fees, they will be used to publish smart contracts or interact with them. 
> We shall get some tR-BTC in the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The balance is 0 and we need some tR-BTC to pay gas fees,
which will be used to publish smart contracts and interact with them. 
We shall obtain some in the next step.
```

# TestNet Faucet

You can get some tR-BTC from the [RSK Testnet faucet](https://faucet.testnet.rsk.co/).

Copy the first address from `.accounts` file. In my case, it is

```
0xe16f6abdd5815f3d24b4e5c29138f863933b000a
```

Enter your wallet address and pass the CAPTCHA.

![faucet.testnet.rsk.co](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-38.png)

Wait a few seconds…

![Wait a few seconds](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-39.png)

![Received some R-BTCs](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-40.png)

You can see the transaction hash:

[0x4a2bf1f65c525219020c3a1215a29453c20f4ced90575d9a7d13f8fe666d05b4](https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0x4a2bf1f65c525219020c3a1215a29453c20f4ced90575d9a7d13f8fe666d05b4)

Now I have 0.05 R-BTC!

## Recheck balance

To check balance again, run this command in the Truffle console:

```javascript
(await web3.eth.getBalance(accounts[0])).toString()
```

![getBalance accounts 0 again](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-41.png)

Great! Now I have 50000000000000000, which means that I have 0.05 tR-BTC with 18 decimal places of precision.

# Where to go from here

> Now we have installed all requirements and created an empty project using Truffle framework and Open Zeppelin smart contracts library, connected to a RSK local node or RSK testnet.
> 
> We have not developed anything yet, but this tutorial equips you to move to the next tutorials, where we will develop very cool projects!
> 
> Choose any of these to tutorials to begin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, we have installed all requirements and created an empty project using Truffle framework and Open Zeppelin smart contracts library,
connected to both an RSK local node (Regtest) and the RSK Testnet.

We have not developed anything yet,
but you are now ready to move on to the next tutorials,
where we will develop some very cool projects!

Choose any of these to tutorials to begin:
```

![Verify authenticity](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-08.png)

> If you are using a Windows OS, I suggest to use the Git Bash terminal. Download the installer from the [Git official site](https://git-scm.com/) .

Author: I know this information is repeated, but I prefer to keep it as a reminder

```

> Add the parameter  `-Drpc.providers.web.cors=*` before `co.rsk.Start` to enable our RSK local node to accept connections from our front-end, by disabling Cross-origin Resource Sharing (CORS) restrictions.
If you see no output - that is a good thing:
Its output is directed to a log file.

If you do not have any output after running the command, this usually means that the node is running successfully. We will confirm this in the next step.
> Note the flag provided above: `-Drpc.providers.web.cors=*`
> This disables cross origin resource sharing protection,
> effectively allowing any web page to access it.
> As we want to make JSON-RPC requests from a browser,
> such as a DApp, we need this flag.

This is the result in the terminal in Windows OS:

![Run local node](/assets/img/tutorials/setup-truffle-oz/image-09.png)

**Important:**

> Do not close this terminal/console window, If closed the local node would stop running.
> Do not close this terminal/console window,
> if closed the local node will stop running.

### Check if the node is running using cURL

Open a new terminal window. 

Issue a request to the node's RPC HTTP server. 

> If you are using a Windows OS, I suggest to use the Git Bash terminal. Download the installer from the Git official site. [https://git-scm.com/](https://git-scm.com/) .

Author: I know this information is repeated, but I prefer to keep it as a reminder
